Chorus.

Faithful to them that sailed oversea
To Grecian lands our name we hold,
"The Persians' Trust"; true guardians we
Of many a temple rich in gold
And holy, whom our Lord and King,
Xerxes, Darius-born,
For age and honour hath extolled
To watch his land forlorn. 

1#

And while we wait his homecoming,
For him and for his golden host
With fear and dark imagining
My spirit in a storm is tossed.
For all the strength of Asia born,
Like hounds at a young master's horn
Baying, away hath flown,
And now for long no royal post
Cometh, no rider from the host,
Back to great Persia's Throne.
From Agbatan, from Susa tall,[Pg 20   16-41]
From ancient Kissia's guarded wall,
We saw the horse and chariot go,
The gliding ships, the footmen slow,
In pomp of war far-thrown.

2#

Among them men of mighty name,
Amistras, Artaphernes, came,
Astaspes, Megabâtes, Lords
Of Persia, kings beneath the Eye
Of the one King, most great, most high,
Ruling their subject hordes,
With trampling horse, with clanging bow,
Dread to behold and stern to know,
High hearts and faithful swords.
Then Artembar, glad knight in fray,
Imaios of the shafts that slay,
Masistras, Pharandâkes, yea,
And charioted Sosthânes
Rode past us. Many another king
Did Nile the many-childed bring,
To war; the Master of the Spring,
Egyptian Sousiskânes,
Arsam the tall, who holdeth guard
Over holy Memphis, Ariomard
From ageless Thebes, with river men
Who bend the bow and stride the fen,
Multitudes dark and fell.

3#

We saw the armies proud and gay
Of Lydia, who in thralldom sway
The tribes of Asia; them the wise[Pg 21   42-64]
Arcteus and Mêtrogâthes, Eyes
Of the Great King, from Sardis sent
With all her golden armament:
In fourfold aye and sixfold team
We saw their myriad chariots gleam,
Fearful to see or tell.
There marched the Tmolian mountaineer
Who vowed on Hellas' neck to cast
The bond slave's yoke. There Mardon passed
And Tharybis, anvils of the spear;
There, rank by rank, the Mysian lance
Flashed; and with trailing wide advance

4#

There swept the golden Babylon
Her motley nations on and on;
Men of the river, men who know
The magic of the fearless bow,
And all the long-knived multitude
Of Asia's hidden valleys, rude
But faithful, followed, row on row,
King's men untameable.

5#

—So hath the flower of Persia's youth
Departed, whom in strong desire
This Asian soil that nursed their growth
Lamenteth; and without avail
Full many a sire,
Full many a wife and mother stay
Waiting as day still followeth day,
And dread the lengthening tale.

6#

[Strophe 1[Pg 22   65-86]
—They are gone, the great armies battle-proven,
City-quellers; they have reached the further side;
They have builded them a causeway flax-enwoven
Over the strait where maiden Helle sank and died.
For they sought a path and found it,
And with many fetters bound it
For a yoke upon the shoulders of the tide.

7#

[Antistrophe 1
And the dread King, his multitudes he guideth
As a flock God hath given to his hand.
In his stern true captains he confideth
To be masters of the water and the land.
From the shower of heavenly gold
Were his fathers sprung of old,
And god-like among mortals doth he stand.

8#

[Strophe 2
In his dark eye is the glare of a serpent, flashing fear;
Many-handed, many-navied, he hath spurred his Syrian car;
He descendeth on the nations; he has baffled the strong spear
With the bow-shaft that slayeth from afar.

9#

[Antistrophe 2[Pg 23   87-106]
In whom, then, confide ye, to withstand the armèd flood,
Put his gyves upon the storm and enchain the rushing tide?
For the armies of the Persian none living hath withstood,
And the land's heart laugheth in its pride.

A#

[Strophe 3
So it hath been from of old; the overthrowing of strong towers
Is the birthright of the Persian, god-appointed to his trust;
And the thunder of the horsemen and their gladness, it is ours,
And the trampling of cities in the dust.

B#

[Antistrophe 3
We have turned us to the sea, and no fear is in our mind;
With our bridges cable-woven we have climbed from steep to steep;
We have seen the waves whiten in the fury of the wind,
We have faced the holy places of the deep.

—But the deep craft of God, who shall 'scape from it or hide him?[Pg 24   107-127]
Can the runner run so swift, can the leaper leap so high?
Man seeeth but a smile, and lo, Atê is beside him,
With the net none outclimbeth till he die.

C#

[Strophe 4
—Therefore doth my spirit mourn,
Robed in darkness, stabbed with fear,
Lest a cry the people hear,
"Woe, woe;
Woe for Persia's host forlorn,"
Ringing through the wide unmanned
Streets of Susa's lonely land.

D#

[Antistrophe 4
And the ancient Kissian hold
Shall reply with manifold
Lamentation, murmuring,
"Woe, woe,
Woe for people and for King,"
Till the women weep, and tear
The fine linen robes they wear.

All the hands that chariots drive,
All the feet of armèd tread,
Gone, like bees that leave the hive,[Pg 25   128-154]
Round their one lord marshallèd:
Out beyond the bridgèd tide
That doth world from world divide.

And at home, whence these are gone
There be pillows wet with tears,
Where some woman, delicately
Proud, as Persian women be,
Yearning for her man, her own
Battle-fiery warrior, gone
Forth amid the flashing spears,
Bears the yoke alone.

E#

Leader.

—Peace! And before this ancient pile,
Lords of the land true-counselling,
Repose ye, and take thought the while
What need is come, how fares our King:
Is it the bow's victorious sway
Or iron spear-head wins the day?

—But hither, like a star of heaven
One cometh, Mother to the King
And Queen to me. I bow the knee.
Persians, to her be reverence given
By all, and words of welcoming.

F#

[As the Elders move right and left to sit upon the steps the Queen enters in her chariot of state with many followers.

[Pg 26   155-167]

Leader.

O Queen most high, above all Persia's deep-girt daughters glorified,
Thou Xerxes' reverend Mother, Hail! All hail to thee, Darius' bride.
A god of Persia gave thee love, a god of Persia hast thou born,
Unless that star that shone of old hath faded from this land forlorn.

G#

Atossa.

For that I came. For that I left my chambers canopied with gold,
Darius' chamber, where he slept, where in his arms I lay of old;
And care is plucking at my heart. O friends and faithful, to your ears
I trust a tale, not mine alone; the tale of one beset with fears
Lest Fate, our master, overturn, onsweeping with relentless stride,
The splendours that Darius reared when, sure, some god was at his side.
For that there murmureth in my heart a thought two-edged and hard to tell:
"Put not thy trust in store of wealth, save men be there to guard it well:
Nor if the poor man's fame is dim, forget what strength is in his hand."
Wealth, arms, and ships enough are ours. Yet for the Eye of all the land[Pg 27   168-184]
I tremble. Is not Persia's Eye her King? Therefore I ask of you
Your counsel in this fear, my Persians, ye the agèd and the true,
In whom for faithful words and wise my trust is and has ever been.

H#

Leader.

Thou art the mistress of the land, and never shalt summon twice, O Queen,
Our aid in counsel or in act, wherever we have the power to guide;
Servants true-hearted in thy need are these thou callest to thy side.
[Atossa descends from the Chariot.
Atossa.

I#

Long have I dwelt with visions through the hours
Of darkness, ever since, with all his powers
Marshalled, my son departed for the shore
Of Hellas, conquering. But never before
Flashed there so clear a vision on my sight—
I tell thee the whole tale—as yester night.
Meseemed there came two women in fair guise,
Robed, one in Persian garb, one Dorian-wise,
Clear to my dreaming sight: in stature far
Grander they seemed than earthly women are,
Of flawless beauty, sisters of one race.[Pg 28   185-211]
Each had her home in its appointed place,
In Hellas one, and one in Barbary.

J#

Then rose between them, so I seemed to see,
Some discord; and my son saw, and would fain
Calm them, and make them gentle to the rein
Beneath his chariot, and his yoke would bind
On both their necks; and one with head inclined
Was glad and plumed her in that harness proud,
Meek to the curb. The other, all uncowed,
Struggled, and with both hands asunder tore
The harness, and away unbridled bore
The chariot, and at mid-yoke snapt the wood;
And my son fell. And there beside him stood
His father, King Darius, pityingly.
And Xerxes, when he saw him, gave a cry
And rent his robes. So much I saw in dream.

K#

I rose and quickly in a flowing stream
Cleansed me, and with an incense-bearing train
Approached our altar-stair, to pour amain
To Them that avert Evil their full meed
Of offering. They it is whom now we need.
When, lo, an eagle in the air, which fled
To Apollo's temple! Dumb I stood with dread:
And looked, and there, pursuing in full flight,
A hawk wide-winged, with talons stretched to smite
The eagle's head. And he did naught but cower
And yield his body to the victor's power.
Terrors be these for me to look upon,
For you to hear. Howbeit, be sure, my son,
Victorious, shall be alway among men[Pg 29   212-225]
A wonder; if he fail . . . Nay, even then,
Once saved, he abideth no man's reckoning,
But reigneth still unchallenged, Persia's King.

L#

Leader.

O Mother of the Land, we fain would neither turn thee to despair,
Nor yet embolden overmuch. Go thou and seek the gods in prayer:
Is aught among thy dreams amiss, beseech that it be turned to naught;
Is aught good, to thy house and thee be it to blessed fullness brought,
Yea, and to all the land and all who love us. Next, drink offerings pour
To great Earth and her buried dead; but chiefly with thy love implore
Thy lord Darius—sayest thou not himself was with thee yester night?—
To send for thee and for his son good things from darkness up to light;
Whatever is other, let Earth hold it down, let Darkness make it blind!
No prophet I; only in love I speak, with seercraft of the mind,
Thy dream so reading that, whatever it bode, the end may griefless be.
[Pg 30   226-235]

M#

Atossa.

So be it! First reader of my dreams, a loving seer I find in thee;
And strong thy word of omen hast thou made, for me and for my sons.
That which is good may Heaven fulfil! These issues, as thy counsel runs,
I lay upon the gods above and the beloved who lie below;
So saying I go within.—Yet stay. There is a thing I fain would know;
Say where, in all this peopled world, a city men call Athens lies?

N#

Leader.

Far distant, where our Lord the Sun sinks and his last effulgence dies.
Atossa.

And this far western land it is my son so craved to make his prey?
Leader.

Aye, for if Athens once were his, all Hellas must his word obey.
Atossa.

Has Athens then such multitudes, such hosts of mighty men, to lead?
[Pg 31   236-242]

Leader.

A faithful army, which of old hath wrought much havoc on the Mede.
Atossa.

An army; have they likewise wealth, enough to keep the land from dearth?
Leader.

A silver fountain-spring is theirs, a secret treasure-house of Earth.
Atossa.

What weapon flashes in their hands? Have they the bow that smites afar?
Leader.

Not so; the spear that stabbeth close, the shield that goes not back in war.
Atossa.

What master holds them in the fray, what shepherd's rod to drive the herd?
Leader.

To no man living are they slaves, nor bow them before no man's word.
[Pg 32   243-254]

Atossa.

Unmastered, how can they endure the onset of an angry foe?
Leader.

Methinks Darius knoweth, and his great and goodly armies know.
Atossa.

Thy words bring evil thoughts to them whose children are beyond the sea.
Leader.

But stay; methinks thou soon shalt hear the full tale, yea, the certainty.
I see out yonder one that runs as runs the Persian couriers; Oh,
For sure some certain news at last he beareth, be it weal or woe!

O#

[Enter the Messenger.
Messenger.

O walls of all the East, O towers of might,
Persia, my home, thou haven of delight,
How in one blow our garnered bliss is fled,
All, and the flower of Persia fallen and dead!
God's mercy, though 'tis bitter to the soul
To bear ill tidings, I must needs unroll
The full tale of our sorrow. The whole host[Pg 33   255-271]
Of Barbary, O my countrymen, is lost!
[He breaks down in tears, and in the following scene only recovers himself for a moment at a time.

P#

Chorus.          [Strophe 1

O pain, burden of pain
Fierce-hearted, strange:
Ye Persians, weep amain
For sorrow, for times that change.
Messenger.

All yonder, all is death. Alone I come
And beyond hope, to see the light of home.

Q#

Chorus.          [Antistrophe 1

This life, 'tis a tale long told
Long borne; to hear
A-sudden, being so old,
Griefs that surpass our fear.
Messenger.

I heard not others' tales. Myself was there
To read the full-told story of despair.
Chorus.          [Strophe 2

In vain! was it all in vain,
Those crowding shafts of war
Flew over the Asian main
To the Hellene's angry shore?
[Pg 34   272-289]

Messenger.

Crowded with dead men miserably lost
Is Salamis, and the bay, and all the coast.

R#

Chorus.          [Antistrophe 2

They whom we loved, Ah me,
Wave-beaten limbs sea-dyed,
Dead things awash in the sea,
The long cloaks flapping wide!
Messenger.

Our arrows served us not; the beakèd prow
Shattered our ships, and laid the bowmen low.
Chorus.          [Strophe 3

Woe to the men of war! Uplift your voice
In bitter weariness, in long lament.
Shall all that is evil everywhere rejoice?
Is that great host forespent?
Messenger.

Salamis! Salamis! Oh, name of hate!
I groan remembering Athens, now too late.
Chorus.          [Antistrophe 3

Hate her, ye men of war! Let her be hated
For ever. "Athens": see ye forget her not.
Remember the widows, the childless, the unmated:
These things hath Athens wrought.
[Pg 35   290-309]

S#

Atossa.

Long have I held my peace, as one struck dumb
With sorrow. When so vast a thing is come
Upon us, who can tell it, or who dare
To ask the story? . . . Yet, since man must bear
What the gods send, be still, thou, and unroll—
Albeit thy tears yet run—thine evil scroll
To the utter end. Say first, who is not slain
Of sceptred kings, and who shall never again
Look on this land, but leave an empty throne?
Messenger.

Xerxes himself yet lives, and sees the sun.
Atossa.

That word is joy to all my house, a bright
Gleam, as of morning after starless night.

T#

Messenger.

But Artembar lies battered—he the chief
Of myriad horse—on the Silenian reef.
The chiliarch Dadokas, in one fell leap,
Tossed by a lance, went headlong to the deep.
On Ajax' rock, wave-beaten, tempest-blown,
Lies Bactria's best and truest, Tenagôn.
Lilaios, Arsames, Argestes too,
By that small isle where the wild pigeons flew
Lay, butting in the refluence of the wave[Pg 36   310-336]
The hard ground with their foreheads. Arcteus brave,
Who dwelt beside the Nile-spring's furthest marge,
Adeuas, and the wielder of the targe,
Pharnouchos, fell, three from a single barque.
Lordly Metallos, Chryse's myriadarch,
The tangled forest of his beard so red
Hath dyed a costlier crimson; he lies dead.

U#

Ahrab the Mede, and Bactrian Artabas,
Who led three myriad coal-black horse, alas!
Drowning, upon a cruel shore they found
Refuge and perished as they touched the ground.
Amistris and Amphistreus of the dart
Unresting, Ariomardos true of heart—
How Sardis loved him!—Mysian Artames,
And Tharybis, the cleaver of the seas
With five times fifty ships, of Lyrna's race. .
I saw him dead, a man once fair of face,
Alas, in death not happy! And withal
Syennesis, the highest heart of all,
Cilicia's lord, none like him in the fray,
Ringed with dead Greeks, in glory passed away.

V#

Atossa.

Alas, thy tale is as a mountain steep
Of grief; yea, shame and lamentation deep
In Persia. But go back, and tell me this.
What were the numbers of the craft of Greece?
How did they dare confront the serried row
Of Persian ships in onset prow to prow?
[Pg 37   337-354]

Messenger.

For multitude, be sure, our eastern men
Had conquered, for the Greeks had squadrons ten,
Thirty in each, with ten select for speed
On special service. Under Xerxes' lead—
I know the numbers—stood a thousand sail,
And separate, of speed incomparable,
Two hundred keels and seven. . Who shall say
We were too weak to face the foe that day?
But some dark daemon, with no poisèd scale,
Down weighed us, and made strength of no avail.
Those gods protect their own Athêna's land.
Atossa.

How so? Does Athens yet unbroken stand?
Messenger.

While her men live, she hath a breechless wall.

W#

Atossa.

How first began the battle? Tell me all.
Was it the Greek who struck, or did the King,
My son, his great force to the hazard fling?
Messenger.

Queen, for the first beginning of these woes,
Some fiend or madman—whence he came, who knows?—
Greek-seeming, from the Athenian ranks drew near[Pg 38   355-383]
To Xerxes' self, and whispered in his ear
That, once the veil of hiding night should fall,
The Greeks would wait no more, but one and all
Leap to their oars, and, scattering left and right,
Make off to save their lives in headlong flight.
Xerxes gave ear, and reckoning not the while
Of heaven's malignity or Grecian guile,
His word to all the ship-masters sent round;
Soon as the sun should leave the parchèd ground
And darkness take the temples of the sky,
The main fleet in three columns should stand by,
Closing the way to Athens, while the rest
Went round the island, guarding on the west
The narrow ways and races loud with foam.
Else, if the Greeks escaped an evil doom
Finding some secret way of flight, he said,
Each master of a ship would lose his head.

X#

Such was his word; right full of mirth was he,
So little guessed he what the end should be!
In order and obedience all the fleet
Supped and prepared; each oarsman took his seat
And nimbly to the rowlock strapped his oar.
Meantime the sunlight melted from the shore
And night drew on, and in their ships arrayed
Each man at arms, each bender of the blade,
Waited. From rank to rank the word was passed
Down the long line, and on they moved at last,
Each to his station. All the long night through
Each captain rowing, rowing, kept his crew;
And night wore on, and never sound nor sight[Pg 39   384-414]
From the Greek fleet gave sign of secret flight;
Not till the wild white horses of the morn
Took all the earth with glory; then was borne
A sound across the sea, a voice, a strong
Clamour exultant like a leaping song,
And Echo answering from the island rock
Cried battle. To our men there came a shock
Of fear and hopes undone. No note there rang
Of flight in that high paean that they sang,
Only glad courage, hot to do and dare.
Out burst their trumpets, flaming through the air.
In splashed their foaming oars, and straining stirred
The briny furrows at the helmsman's word,
And all the ships were out and clear to view.
The right wing led the van, in order due,
Behind it the whole fleet, prow after prow.
Then one great shout: 

Y#

"Now, sons of Hellas, now!
Set Hellas free, set free your wives, your homes,
Your gods' high altars and your fathers' tombs.
Now all is on the stake!" 

Z#

At once from us
A storm of Persian voices clamorous
Made answer, but no time was left to speak.
Already ship on ship its brazen beak
Had driven. The first rammer was a Greek,
Which sheared away a great Sidonian's crest;
Then close, one on another, charged the rest.
At first the long-drawn Persian line was strong
And held; but in those narrows such a throng
Was crowded, ship to ship could bring no aid.
Nay, with their own bronze-fangèd beaks they made[Pg 40   415-437]
Destruction; a whole length of oars one beak
Would shatter; and with purposed art the Greek
Ringed us outside, and pressed, and struck; and we—
Our oarless hulls went over, till the sea
Could scarce be seen, with wrecks and corpses spread.
The reefs and beaches too were filled with dead,
And every ship in our great fleet away
Rowed in wild flight. And there, through all the bay,
As men kill tunnies crowded on the shore,
Or some great fish, with clubs of broken oar
And spars of wreck, they beat and broke and killed
Our men. With crying all the air was filled,
Out from the narrows to the shoreless main,
Of slain men and men wailing for the slain,
Till the blind veil of night swept all away.
Not though for ten long days, day after day,
I spoke, could I express that mass of woe.
For never yet—this ye may surely know—
Have on one day so many thousands died.

1#

Atossa.

Ah me, a flood of suffering deep and wide
Hath broke on Persia, yea, and all the east.
Messenger.

O Queen, all thou hast heard, twofold increased,
Were not yet all. Such added coils of woe
Befell as twice outbalance those ye know.
[Pg 41   438-458]

Atossa.

What bitterer fortune can there be? But tell
Thy tidings to the last. What thing befell
Darkening our skies to this still deadlier storm?
Messenger.

The chosen of the host, of goodliest form,
Of noblest lineage, of most valiant sword,
And truest heart at the King's counsel board,
Are dead, unpitied and unhonoured, all.
Atossa.

O ye who love me, 'tis an evil fall.
But tell thy tale. By what fate perished these?
Messenger.

An isle there is, in Salaminian seas,
Small, of ill anchorage, where none may dwell
Save Pan the dancer by the soft sea swell.
Here Xerxes landed them. He hoped that, when
Flung from their broken vessels, shipwrecked men
Made for the island, these might watch, and slay
Our enemies floundering, an easy prey
Amid those briny streams, or save a friend
If any came. Ill he foresaw the end!
Soon as God gave them victory on the sea,
The Greeks, ere fall of eve, their panoply
Of bronzen arms did on, and leaping out,
Landed and ringed that island all about.
Our men had no escape. From left and right[Pg 42   459-481]
Stones hand-flung battered them, and flight on flight
Of arrows from the bow-string raining slew.
Then in one rush they charged, and overthrew
Our lines and hacked and butchered, till no more
Breathed any life of man upon that shore.
And Xerxes groaned, looking upon that deep
Of misery. For a throne he had, a steep
And towering crest, hard by the open sea,
Commanding all the field. Yea, bitterly
His voice he lifted up, his robes he rent,
And order swift to the land army sent,
Then headlong turned and fled. Weep then, for more
Affliction, beside that I told before.
Atossa.

O Doom of Wrath, how hast thou made untrue
The hope of Persia! Long my son shall rue
His vengeance on great Athens. . . . Had the plain
Of Marathon not enough of Persian slain?
For whom he needs must seek revenge, and lo,
Heaps on his head this magnitude of woe.
But speak, the ships that 'scaped that evil day,
Where dids't thou leave them? Hast thou power to say?
Messenger.

The galleys that escaped, discomfited,
Blindly before the wind to refuge fled.
Meantime the army: on Boeotian ground[Pg 43   482-507]
One part was left, and thirsted, crowding round
Some little well, or empty, labouring
For breath, went searching for some water spring.
The rest of us, retreating, made our way
Through Phocis, Locris, and the Melian bay,
Where old Spercheios, streaming through the flat,
Brought us his blessed water. After that
Food failed, as through the Achaean vale we fled,
And wallèd Thessaly. 'Twas there the dead
Fell thickest, some from hunger, some from thirst.
The two were there together. Then we burst
Through to Magnesia and the mountain coast
Of Macedon. By Axios' ford we crossed,
Passed the marsh reeds of Bolbe and the cold
Ridge of Pangaion, that the Edonians hold.
That night God sent a storm, and winter came
Out of all season and froze hard the stream
Of holy Strymon. Many a man, who never
Had recked at all before of god or prayer,
Then lifted up his voice and bowed his knee
To Earth and Heaven. Aye, long and earnestly
They prayed, and then across the ice-bound flood
Set forth. And verily their luck was good
Who crossed before the light of morning came.
For soon a bright round sun, with rays like flame,
Spread heat, and midway pierced the ice beneath.
In crowds, one on another, down to death
They fell; and him I hold the happiest
Whose life-breath soonest failed him. For the rest,
Escaped beyond the river, day by day,[Pg 44   508-529]
With toil and sweat through Thrace they forced their way,
And now, a scant and scattered band, return
To the old land where still our hearth-fires burn.
Well may this realm of Persia weep in ruth
For those her best-beloved, her people's youth.
All I have told is true, but much unsaid
Remains that God hath hurled on Persia's head.
Leader.

O Fortune hard to fathom, how on all
That Persia loved thy heavy hand doth fall!
Atossa.

Woe for a mighty army sunk so deep!
Thou vision of my phantom-haunted sleep
Most clear thou didst foretell some evil thing!
And all too light was your interpreting.
Howbeit, as thou hast counselled, first will I
Give prayer and worship to the gods on high,
And then to Earth and the Departed bring
Out of my stores a rich drink-offering—
Too late, I know, when that 'gainst which I pray
Is past; yet something peradventure may
Be left, which prayer can mend. Therefore do you
With others of true heart take counsel true
To meet our land's affliction. And my son—
If he should here return while I am gone,
Comfort ye him, and guide him to the door,[Pg 45   530-557]
Lest to these griefs he add yet one grief more.
[Exit Atossa, with retinue, into the Palace.
Leader.

O Zeus, how hast thou, then, cast down
All Persia's host, the great, the proud,
And buried in a weeping cloud
Agbatana's and Susa's town!
Now many a silken veil shall fall
Torn by soft hands, and many a breast
Be wet with tears through veil and vest
For grief that is the grief of all.
And many a gentle Persian bride
Is yearning for her lord new-wed,
The tender arms, the silken bed,
Youth and its joyance and its pride.
They weep, they weep, unsatisfied;
And shall not we, the old men, shed
Tears of remembrance for the dead?
Chorus.          [Strophe 1

—Now riseth up on either hand
A groan from Persia's empty land:
Xerxes hath led, Ah, woe is me!
Xerxes hath lost, Ah, misery!
Xerxes hath wrought his evil thought
With galleys on the waste of sea.
And where wast thou, the Untouched of Woe,
Darius of the conquering Bow,
Our Lord, our loved one, long ago?

[Antistrophe 1[Pg 46   558-579]
—Landsmen and seamen, there they lie:
O sweeping wing, O darkling eye,
Of ships that led, Ah, woe is me!
Of ships that lost, Ah, misery!
They sank below the beakèd blow
And Yâwân smote them down to die;
And now along the uncomforted
And angry tracks of Thrace, they said,
With followers few, the King is fled.

[Strophe 2
—But some, by an earlier doom
Snared to die,
Ah me, where the billows lash
The crags that are Cychreus' Tomb,
Lie weltering. Wail and gnash
Your teeth! Uplift your cry
As a dark cloud in the sky!
Let your voice drain
Its last wild note from pain.

[Antistrophe 2
They are torn by the awful sea;
They are gnawed, Woe's me,
By the voiceless tribes that creep
From the womb of the virgin deep:
And the desolate houses weep
"We are old, we are childless": High[Pg 47   580-601]
It is lifted; it fills the sky.
Do these not know
The extreme depth of woe?

[Strophe 3
—No more over the Orient nations
The Law of the Persian hath sway.
No more do they bring supplications
And tribute to Him they Obey,
Nor bow them in worship and cower
On the earth; for the Great King's power
Is fallen away.

[Antistrophe 3
The tongue of mankind is no longer
In prison; the yoke is undone
Of greatness; a voice riseth stronger
From people whose freedom is won.
The blood-soaked wave-lashed Isle
Of Ajax hath wrecked by guile
Persia's great throne.
[Re-enter Atossa with only two attendants.
Atossa.

He who hath walked the hard ways of the world
Well knoweth how, when once the storm is hurled
Upon him, man sees terrors everywhere,
Even as before, when fate was flowing fair,
He deemed for ever the same wind would blow.[Pg 48   602-627]
Wherever I turn my world is full of woe.
Against mine eyes shapes of God's anger stare,
And in mine ears ring voices of despair,
Such depth of fear hath cast all reason out.
Therefore without my chariots, and without
The pride I came with, from the house I bring
To my son's sire in peace this offering,
Meet to appease the dim hearts of the dead:
White milk and sweet from kine unblemishèd,
Pale honey that the blossom-thieves distil;
With water blended from a virgin rill;
And here, true offspring of a mother wild,
An ancient vine's bright essence undefiled;
And she whose leaves make spring of all the year,
The olive, lo, her fragrant fruit is here,
And Earth's fair children, flowers, engarlanded.
Friends, with such song as worship of the dead
Beseems, make music, calling from his grave
Darius, the Great Spirit, to rise and save,
While I, the Queen, in due procession go
With draughts earth-slaking to the Gods below.
[Atossa, with her Attendants, offers prayers and
libations at the Tomb.
Leader.

O Queen, of Persia worshippèd,
Through earth's deep veins thine offerings send
While we to Them that guide the Dead
Make song to hear us and befriend.
Ye holy Rulers of the Night,[Pg 49   628-651]
Hermes and Earth, and King dark-browed,
Help now and hinder not the proud
Spirit up-striving to the light;
Some secret comfort he may know,
He only, that would heal our woe.
Chorus.          [Strophe 1

Doth he hearken, he in glory,
The great King who is as god,
To a choked voice, a dumb story
In words strange yet understood?
Shall my sorrow force its way until he hear me
From his realm beneath the sod?

[Antistrophe 1
O ye Lords of the Departed
And thou Earth, ye shall not stay
In his goings the proud-hearted
Spirit, Persia's god alway,
Such an one as never yet—O guide him to us!—
In the soil of Persia lay.

[Strophe 2
As ye loved him, love his grave-mound, where the old kind thoughts abide,
Aïdôneus, thou Upraiser, Aïdôneus, be his guide,
Where a King stalketh lonely to the light.
Dâryâsha!

[Antistrophe 2[Pg 50   652-675]
In the madness of lost battles never wasted he our youth;
They had named him "God in Counsel," and God counselled him in truth,
For his hand upon the helm steered aright.
Dâryâsha!

[Strophe 3
O our Ba'al, ancient Ba'al, be thou near!
On the crest of this thy grave-mound, Oh, appear!
Let the crocus-golden sandal give a sign;
Let the High King's tiara rise and shine;
Thou our Father, thou undarkened, hear, Oh hear!
Ba'alênu!

[Antistrophe 3
A thing meet for lamentation and strange woe,
O thou Master of our Masters, hear and know;
For a darkness as of death is overhead,
And the youth of all our people lieth dead,
Thou our Father, thou undarkened, far below.
Ba'alênu!

—Long dead, long wept for, why
Why hath this been,
King, King, to whom we cry,
This thing unknown before,
This two-fold monstrous weeping wage of sin?[Pg 51   676-696]
A dead land, and at sea
The ships, the three-bank oarèd ships, Ah me!
Oarèd no more, no more.
Dâryâsha! Ba'alênu!
[The Ghost of Darius rises slowly from out his Tomb. The Elders prostrate themselves before him.

Darius.

O ye among the true supreme in truth,
Elders of Persia, comrades of my youth,
What ails my land? Why groans she thus forlorn,
Her brow sore bruisèd and her body torn?
To see my wife but now beside my grave
I trembled, nor refused the gifts she gave.
And now ye too in grief, on either hand,
With necromantic lamentation stand,
Crying for help. Hard is the road I tread;
Hard every way, and They that hold the dead
Have swifter hands to grasp than to let go.
Yet, seeing I have some power among them, lo,
I am here. But haste. I may not linger late.
What strange affliction boweth down my state?
Chorus.

Oh, we fear to meet thine eye,
And we fear to make reply,
For the awe that was about thee from of old.
[Pg 52   697-709]

Darius.

'Twas but in answer to your call I clove the darkness and am here.
What would ye with me? Waste me not this little hour with words of fear,
But, showing plain what need thou hast, speak on and that old awe forget.
Chorus.

Oh, we fear to see thy face,
And we dare not grant thy grace,
With a tale too bitter to be told.
Darius.

So be it. Since that ancient awe beneath your bosoms lingereth yet,
Thou, agèd partner of my bed, thou, Queen of royal lineage, cease
From lamentation. Let me hear these tidings clearly and in peace.
Affliction is man's lot, and needs must come to things of mortal birth.
Evils abundant from the seas are born, and evils from the earth,
To fall upon mankind, as life draws onward in its lengthening span.
Atossa.

O thou exalted on a throne more than the thrones of mortal man,
In life all Persia held thee blest, a sunlit life of happy breath,[Pg 53   710-720]
And now, to have died ere eyes have seen our fall, I hold thee blest in death.
Darius, but a little time sufficeth to make all things known.
Let the dread word be spoken. All our power is wrecked and overthrown.
Darius.

How wrecked? Came there some pestilence from heaven? Or treason in the state?
Atossa.

Not so, O King. Our army round the shores of Athens met its fate.
Darius.

Athens? And who among my sons hath marched the Persian armies there?
Atossa.

The fiery Xerxes. For that march he swept the plains of Asia bare.
Darius.

How went he forth, by land or sea—unhappy—on a quest so vain?
Atossa.

By land and sea at once he moved, a two-fold front and armies twain.
[Pg 54   721-728]

Darius.

So vast an army, and on foot! How could they cross the narrow sea?
Atossa.

On Hellê's flood his engines laid a yoke, to make the passage free.
Darius.

And this he wrought! With prison bars he curbed the living Bosphorus?
Atossa.

'Tis so. Methinks there wrought with him some daemon that he ventured thus.
Darius.

Surely, some daemon great in power to shed such darkness over his thought!
Atossa.

Till now all men may see the end, and know what issue he hath wrought.
Darius.

What stroke then hath befallen, that thus ye wail as for a nation lost?
Atossa.

The ships defeated fled, and brought destruction on the land-borne host.
[Pg 55   729-736]

Darius.

Is all the strength of Persia, all alike, so wasted by the spear?
Atossa.

These empty streets of Susa town weep for the men that are not here.
Darius.

Alas, ye gods! The faithful band, the help of all in need, undone!
Atossa.

And Bactria's armies utterly are perished; none remaineth, none!
Darius.

Unhappy son, the youth, the flower of Persia's warriors cast away!
Atossa.

And Xerxes, with a faithful few, deserted and alone, they say. . . .
Darius.

Came to what end at last, and where? Speak out. Is anything not lost?
Atossa.

Came, thanking God, back to the bridge whereby from world to world he crossed.
[Pg 56   737-749]

Darius.

And stands again on Persian soil in safety? This is very sooth?
Atossa.

It is. 'Mid many rumours this prevaileth. None denies its truth.
Darius.

I see all; 'tis the end foretold. How swift the oracle hath sped!
The word of Zeus, I knew, must be fulfilled; and lo, on Xerxes' head
It falleth. I had looked for this not until many years were gone,
But when man hasteth of himself toward sorrow, God will help him on.
Here is a spring of evils burst on us and ours, which all might know
Save him who, understanding not, in his hot youth, hath made it flow.
He thought in fetters, like a slave, the holy Hellespont to bind,
And Bosphorus, the stream of God, refashion to his mortal mind.
With hammered bonds of iron he wrought for a great host a far-flung road,
And, not in wisdom, dreamed a dream that man could match himself with God,
Subdue Poseidon! What was this but madness of the soul? I fear[Pg 57   750-768]
Lest my long garnered treasure fall a prey to the first ravisher.
Atossa.

These be the lessons he hath learned, our fiery son, from men of naught,
Who whispered, clinging to his side, how thou with conquering spear hadst wrought
Great kingdoms for thy sons, while he, unmanly, never past the gate
Had moved in arms, nor added one new province to thine ancient state.
Heard day by day from evil men, such gibings goaded him to seek
At last some deed of deathless fame, and hurl his armies on the Greek.
Darius.

Therefore is done the deed they lusted for,
Great and undying, such as never before
Hath fallen, to lay all Susa desolate,
Not since God first to man this high estate
Granted, that over all realms of Asia one,
Bearing the staff of law, should rule alone.
Mêdos was first to guide his multitude;
A son of Mêdos next, whose rule was good,
For wisdom was the helmsman of his mind.
Then Cyrus, happiest he of human kind,
Brought by his rule to all the Faithful peace.[Pg 58   769-792]
Lydia and Phrygia did his realm increase,
Yâwân he drove before him. Yet, I wot,
Merciful was he, and God loathed him not.
The fourth to rule the land was Cyrus' son;
The fifth, false Mardos, shame to the ancient throne
And soil that bore him; him, with treason true,
Bold Artaphernes in his castle slew,
With six good comrades, plighted to the deed.
And lots were cast, and fell as I had need;
And many lands with many hosts of war
I swept withal, but never thus did mar
My country's fortune. But my son . . . in truth
A young man's thoughts are but the foam of youth:
The charge I gave him Xerxes hath forgot.
O partners of my long life, well ye wot,
Not all who erst have held this ancient throne
Such weight of ill have wrought as he alone.
Leader.

How then, O Lord Darius? Wherein lies
The burden of thy charge? And in what wise
May stricken Persia still her welfare seek?
Darius.

No more against the regions of the Greek
Send forth your hosts, whatever their force and might.
For Earth herself fights with him in his fight.
[Pg 59   793-812]

Leader.

The Earth fights with him? How, O Master, say.
Darius.

Numbers too great by famine she will slay.
Leader.

A small and chosen army we can raise.
Darius.

Nay, for not even the army that now stays
In Greece, shall ever again this country see.
Leader.

How? Is not all the host of Barbary
Returned to Asia safe over Hellê's strait?
Darius.

Few out of many, if God's word of fate
We trust, as knowing sure from days gone by
It falleth not here true and there a lie;
Which thus foretells: By empty hopes made blind
Xerxes a chosen army leaves behind
Where old Asôpus, with his rills like rain,
Boeotia's treasure, waters the wide plain.
There doth the crown of suffering yet await
Those godless, those of pride infatuate,
Who made of Greece their prey, nor held it shame
To rob her gods and give her shrines to flame.
Altars lie wrecked, and images of God
Overthrown, disbased, and down in rubbish trod.
For which dire sin dire suffering now is theirs,[Pg 60   813-838]
And direr still shall be; nor yet appears
Dry land beneath the springs: still, still they flow.
An oozing crust Plataea's field shall know
Of mire blood-soaked beneath the Dorian lance;
And piles of dead dumb warning shall advance
Even to our children's children, that the eye
Of mortal man lift not his hopes too high.
Pride in her flower makes full the barren ears
Of Atê, and no harvest hath but tears.
Ye, therefore, having seen these deeds this way
To judgment brought, remember Athens! Yea,
Remember Hellas! Nor let any man,
Scorning the lot wherewith his life began,
For lust of what he hath not, wreck his bliss.
Zeus sitteth Judge above us. His it is
To check the uncurbèd dreams of man, and weight
Is in his arm to bend the crooked straight.
Therefore do ye, being warned of God to move
In wisdom's way, advise my son, and prove
With grave admonishment, that he may still
The voice of pride, nor war against God's will.
And thou, mine agèd and belovèd, thou
Mother of Xerxes, to thy chambers now
Returning, seek such raiment as is meet
For princes, and go forth therewith to greet
Thy son. There be but tatters round his bare
Breast, of the raiment rent in his despair.
Go, comfort him. From none but thee, be sure,
Counsel or comfort will his heart endure.
I to the dark once more shall tread my path;[Pg 61   839-863]
And ye, old friends, even in this hour of wrath
Grant your soul day by day what she may crave
Of joy. Man takes no riches to the grave.
[The Ghost of Darius sinks beneath the Tomb.
Leader.

'Tis pain to hear the wounds of Barbary,
Many this day, and many yet to be.
Atossa.

Thou Evil Doom, in many a stab thy spite
Hath pierced my flesh; but this, methinks, doth bite
Deepest, the shame and loud dishonouring
Of my son's body. Robes meet for a King
Shall wait his coming. Never shall my care
Fail my belovèd in his deep despair.
[Exit Atossa into the Palace.
Chorus.          [Strophe 1

Golden and great was the life that the Gods let fall to us,
In King Darius' day;
Griefless, unconquered, divine, he was then all in all to us;
And the land loved his sway.
Straight in that day were our goings; our armies were glorious;
Our laws stood firm, like towers;
Unwounded, unwearied, our men came from battle victorious;
Great peace at home was ours.

[Antistrophe 1[Pg 62   864-896]
What far-off peoples he conquered, yet crossed not the Halys,
Nor stirred from his own place!
The brood of the waters, who walk the Strymonian valleys,
Heard from the wilds of Thrace;
The turreted steadings, far up from the Lakeland, unbidden
Bowed to his voice as law;
The proud Hellespontiac cities; Propontis far-hidden;
The Euxine's iron jaw.

[Strophe 2
Far reacheth the horn of the sea, but the wave-lashed islands,
Close to our shores that ride,
Lesbos and olive-rich Samos obeyed his hand,
Myconos, Chios and Paros and Naxos and
Tênos at Andros' side.

[Antistrophe 2
And them in the clasp of the deep, the mid-main highlands
Of Lemnos, he made strong;
Rhodos and Cnidos and Icaros' isle were his,
Cyprian Paphos and Soli and Salamis—
Whose Mother wrought this wrong!
In the portion of Yâwân full many a rich Greek town[Pg 63   897-924]
His wise thought held in fee;
Strength unfailing was ever between his hands,
His mail-clad armies, his aids from a myriad lands.
O Reversal of God, we are broken, we lie cast down,
Scourged by the conquering sea.
[Enter Xerxes.
Xerxes.

And am I fallen, O woe is me,
In this dark coil of misery,
Pathless? O Fate,
How hast thou trod beneath thy hate
The neck of Persia's chivalry!
What cometh yet of grief to bear?
My limbs are melted under me.
O Father Zeus, when I behold
This remnant of my people there,
So few, so old,
May the great darkness veil my head
With them that battled and are dead!
Chorus.

—Cry, cry, O King, for the valiant host,
For the Persian Law and its glory great,
For the beauty of men, the pride, the state,
Cut down and lost!

—The land doth groan for her youth, her own,
The youth of the land whom Xerxes led,
Crowder of Hades with Persian dead!
They are gone, they are gone,[Pg 64   925-947]
The men very many, the bowmen strong,
The flower of the land, a myriad throng.

—For the brave, for the true, woe's me, woe's me!
The land of thy birth, O Lord of the Earth,
Forlorn, forlorn, is fallen to her knee.
Xerxes.          [Strophe 1

Yea, look upon my face, and cry
Your fill. A thing of shame am I,
A thing born to bring misery
To land and house that cherished me.
Chorus.

I waft thee on the wind—let it comfort thy return—
A voice of lost hope, a remembering of fears;
As the dark Mariandynian uplifteth him to mourn,
A loud lamentation, that struggleth with tears.
Xerxes.          [Antistrophe 1

Cry out, and falter not, though weak
With weeping, struggling yet to speak.
All that ye feared might come to be
Hath come, hath turned and fallen on me.
Chorus.

Yea, all will I speak, till the whole tale be said,
The suffering of man, the smiting of the sea,
The burden of a land whose sons lie dead:
I will cry, cry my sorrow till the tears run free.
[Pg 65   948-970]

Xerxes.          [Strophe 2

Yâwân hath ta'en them
Yâwân embattled,
In conquering galleys
In ship-wallèd war;
When he clove the dark of the waters
And the desolate shore.
Chorus.

—Woe, woe! Cry on till he tell thee all!
—Where be the rest, thy friends withal,
The band who fought at the Great King's side?
Where Pharandâkes, and more beside,
Sousas, Pelagon, Psammis, Datamas,
And Sousiskân and Agabatas,
Agabatana's pride?
Xerxes.          [Antistrophe 2

I left them dying;
Fallen I left them
From a Tyrian galley,
Fallen and lost;
By the headlands of Salamis, battered
On the rock-riven coast.
Chorus.

—Why is Pharnouchos not with thee?
—And Ariomardos, where is he?
Where is the Lord Seualkes gone?
Lilaios where, the faithful son?
Memphis, Tharybis and Mâsistras,[Pg 66   971-991]
And Artembar and Hystaichmas?
I ask these things.
Xerxes.          [Strophe 3

They looked upon Athens
The ancient, the loathèd,
And in one fell music
They went to their death,
On the hard land writhing,
Gasping for breath.
Chorus.

Does he too in that ruin lie
Whom Persia knew for thine own Eye
Most faithful, Batanôchos' son,
Counter of myriad myriads, known
And marshalled? Is Alpistos there
And Megabâtes, Sêsames,
And Parthos and Oibâres? Where
Hast left them?—Left them, and they died
Held by the foe! We ask for these.
Wound beyond wound to Persia's pride!
Xerxes.          [Antistrophe 3

Thou wakest my heart's love
For the true companions
With thy tale unforgotten,
Ill on ill, without rest.
The heart crieth, crieth,
From the dark of my breast.
[Pg 67   992-1013]

Chorus.

Others we seek, and more again:
The myriadarch of Mardian men,
Xanthês, the Arians' lord, Anchar;
More, more there are;
Diaixis, aye, and Arsakas,
Captains of horse, they are not here!
Lythimnas tall, and Dadakas,
And Tolmos of the tireless spear.
'Tis strange, 'tis strange! Not round thy silken-lined
Wheel-tent they stand; they follow not behind.
Xerxes and Chorus.      [Strophe 4

Xe.Lost, they are lost,
They that were leaders of the host.
Ch.Lost, alas, without a name!
Xe.Woe's me, woe's me!
Ch.Ye gods, how have ye wrought a shame
We dreamed not of; her image there
Glares as the eyes of Atê glare.

[Antistrophe 4
Xe.Down cast, down cast,
Yea, while the span of life shall last!
Ch.Down to the earth! Is this not plain?
Xe.New woe, new woe!
Ch.With sons of Yâwân on the main
We met, we fought, we fled afar.
Alas, the Persian loves not war!

[Strophe 5[Pg 68   1014-1037]
Xe. Down cast indeed; and my great host
About me lost!—Ch. What is not lost
That once was ours, O Thou that hast
Led all astray?
Xe.This that thou see'st of mine array.
Ch.I see, I see.
Xe.This holder of the shafts that slay.
Ch.A quiver . . . this our only stay?
Xe.Empty of arrows! Woe is me.
Ch.Little is here.
Xe.No helpers near.
Ch.Is Yâwân one that flieth from the spear?

[Antistrophe 5
Xe.Nay, all too valiant. I behold
A grief unlooked for.—Ch. Thou hast told
Of bulwarked Persians backward rolled
Seeking to flee.
Xe.'Twas that I rent my robe to see.
Ch.Ah, well-a-day!
Xe.And more than that of misery!
Ch.Two-fold and three-fold grievous day!
Xe.And joyous to our enemy!
Ch.Our strength undone.
Xe.My state swept bare.
Ch.Our friends deep-sunken in the sea's despair.

[Strophe 6[Pg 69   1038-1059]
Xe.Wet ye our wounds with tears, and homeward go.
Ch.Brought low, brought low!
Xe.Cry as I cry, and beat your bosoms so.
Ch.Grievous gift from woe to woe!
Xe.Make music with me.—Ch. Burdens here
And burdens yonder, tear on tear!

[Antistrophe 6
Xe.Lift arms, lift arms, and sorrow as I say.
Ch.Ah, well-a-day.
Xe.Cry as I cry, and beat your breast this way.
Ch.Lord, to hear is to obey.
Xe.Lift up your voices.—Ch. Even so,
Timed with a black and sobbing blow.

[Strophe 7
Xe.Now beat your breast, and raise a Mysian song.
Ch.Ah, misery!
Xe.Tear me your beard's old honour, white and long.
Ch.'Tis torn, 'tis torn right grievously.
Xe.And cry, yea, cry!—Ch. That will I do for thee.

[Antistrophe 7[Pg 70   1060-1076]
Xe.With blade-like hands thy bosom's raiment tear.
Ch.Ah, misery.
Xe.Think of our soldiers slain, and rend thy hair.
Ch.'Tis torn, 'tis torn right grievously.
Xe.Make wet thine eyes.—Ch. Through tears I cannot see.

Xe.Each make answer as he hears.
Ch.Woe, ah woe!
Xe.Then back into the house with tears.
Ch.O soil of Persia, hard to tread!
Xe.Wailing through the city go.
Ch.Through the long streets, even so.
Xe.O ye that walked so softly, raise your head,
Let your grief roam.
Ch.O soil of Persia, thou art hard to tread!
Xe.O trireme ships, O shoals of Persian dead!
Ch.With sobs that scarce find voice I lead thee home.
[The whole procession has now disappeared into the Palace.